Located at the intersection of three fields of study, our project is interested in the analysis of socio-technical dynamics at work in the co-creation and the appropriation of a free software of management of studies and university tuition in Haiti and Francophone Africa.
The ethical paradigm underlying free software is related to cognitive justice (Birkbeck, 2013) and the need for open and fair science, the foundation of many sustainable development initiatives for Africa and the developing countries. more generally. In the education sector, free software is an important issue, particularly in Southern countries where the budgets dedicated to the education sector are small, while the challenges are innumerable. With free software, academic institutions can for example computerize and modernize at low cost pedagogical approaches as well as management systems studies and schooling. They could also easily have a wealth of information on learners, to monitor school pathways and the development of educational policies. Despite this potential, the teaching and use of proprietary software is still common in universities in the South. However, these are often outdated versions, installed only on a few computers. Sometimes software is not adapted to the context and local realities.
This is the case in some countries such as Burkina Faso and Senegal where universities are gradually trying to adapt the Scolarix module (registration management) of the integrated management software Cocktail Scolarix, for the management of studies, but with enormous difficulties since this software was designed by the University of Rochelle without the participation of actors from the South and on the basis of the functioning and realities of Northern universities (ADEA Task Force TIC, 2014). In Benin, for 4 years the University of Abomey-Calavi, then recently that of Parakou have made the transition from the traditional registration system (paper form) to a computerized system called OKAPI. This software was created at the Catholic University of Louvain (Belgium) for the University of Abomey-Calavi, but its appropriation seems to pose several difficulties inherent in the mode of construction and technology transfer. The results of a group discussion with employees of the Central School of Parakou University about the OKAPI system, reveal indeed huge shortcomings (Alladatin 2017). In addition to complaints about recurring bugs, users point out that the designer still has a manager account and therefore some control over the module installed at school.
Central University of Parakou. Source codes are not available to make corrections locally or to include some locally useful specifics. What is the state of play in the management of university studies and schooling in Haiti and French-speaking Africa? What are the socio-technical dynamics underlying the co-construction and the appropriation of free software for the management of university studies and schooling?
These are the questions at the heart of this pioneering project, but also a pilot. It will provide a practical guide for co-construction and appropriation of technological innovation, which could serve as a rudder for future actions and contribute to a better consideration of user needs in participatory action research. in educational technology.
The general objective of the study is to analyze the socio-technical dynamics at work in the co-creation and the appropriation of a free software of management of studies and university tuition in Haiti and Francophone Africa. Specifically, we seek to achieve six goals:
at. make an inventory of the management of studies and education (software, difficulties, perspectives) in ten African and Haitian universities sampled in a reasoned way,
b. to make a critical inventory of the various free software or not management of studies and schooling in order to consider the modules that could integrate the software to co-build.
c. set up a platform of co-developers of free software,
d. oversee and analyze the open source co-creation process using the open innovation approach (Chesbrough, 2003, OECD, 2016).
e. evaluate the process of implementation and ownership within four universities in order to improve the software, and finally
f. to take stock of all sociotechnical dynamics underlying co-construction and the appropriation of collectively conceived innovation.

This participatory action research project focuses on the dynamics of usage, users and multi-stakeholder cooperation in the co-construction and appropriation of a technological innovation. Our epistemological stance is at odds with the elitist conception of science and technology relegating the user to a passive consumer position, as well as the diffusionist model of technology (Rogers, 1962). We are part of theoretical models of the sociology of innovation that propose conceptual schemes characterized by a process of co-construction in which various entities engaged in dynamics of cooperation and conflict bring out an innovation that is appropriate by
"Active users". The research is therefore based on a conceptual framework derived from three theoretical approaches: the social construction of technologies, the actor-network theory and the "ecological" model of social worlds. These three approaches are used to provide the elements of a theory that, compared to classical models of innovation, redistributes the ability to act between the actors of the development of a socio-technical device. The concepts of reflexivity, community of practice, arena and technical skills are then mobilized to explain the social springs of the commitment of the actors in the co-construction.
True to the principles of open innovation, the co-creation will be between several actors of our learning organization (Pedler et al., 1991) composed of co-developers senior / junior very committed to the cause of free software and students in especially Canadian, Beninese, Cameroonian and Gabonese on the one hand, and the future users of the software from the dozen universities studied, on the other hand.
On the methodological level, the project involves a phase of inventory through critical analysis of technologies, individual interviews and focus group with various users and responsible for the studies and schooling of the universities concerned, a phase of implementation. in place of a collaborative platform between co-developers and users and monitoring of the co-construction process and finally a phase of analysis of the implementation process and appropriation. We will mobilize participatory observation techniques, discourse analysis methods and mixed survey techniques (quantitative and qualitative) in the form of direct and indirect surveys.
